---
title: 1.7 ELSI
author: Skills4EOSC T5.2
tags:
  - FAIR
---
## Description

In this unit you will learn to: 

- Recognise SSH specificities within the research workflow during knowledge production from an ethical, legal and methodological perspective.

## Learning resources

- <a href="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1NGkchwBySowDXNKibz1TL6hEJj0uX8K6/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=102604071504748959042&rtpof=true&sd=true" target="_blank">Presentation Slides</a>

### Ethical, Legal and Social Implications

Written by Luca Schirru (KUL), Sabrina Brizioli (CNR) and Valentina Colcelli (CNR), this section on Social Sciences and Humanities (SSH) and the Ethical, Legal and Social Implications of Data (ELSI) will guide you through the main considerations and frameworks that govern the use of data to ensure that it is in line with ethical standards and legal requirements.

Understanding the nature and source of data is critical. Data can be categorised as personal or non-personal and can be generated by humans or machines. Whether data is personally identifiable or not, and whether significant investment has been made in its collection and verification, influences the applicable legal frameworks, such as the sui generis database right.

The EU's legal framework for data is complex, encompassing multiple directives, regulations and proposals. Key regulations include the GDPR for personal data, the Data Act for IoT data, and the AI Act for high-risk AI systems. Intellectual property rights (IPRs) are also critical, particularly for databases that involve significant investment in their creation or design.

### EU legal framework for data

The legal framework for data is complex and multi-layered. Member States are also parties to international intellectual property treaties. At the EU level, data is governed by several pieces of legislation:

- **Personal Data**: Regulated by the GDPR, which ensures the protection and privacy of individuals' data within the EU.
- **IoT Data**: Covered by the Data Act, which includes both personal and non-personal data.
- **AI Data**: Covered by the AI Act, which sets out data governance frameworks for high-risk AI and ensures access to high-quality datasets for researchers.

Intellectual property rights (IPRs) require special attention, particularly in relation to databases. Databases can be protected under IPRs in two main ways:

a) If they are the author's own intellectual creation by reason of the selection or arrangement of their contents. 
b) if there has been a substantial investment in obtaining, verifying or presenting the contents, thereby preventing extraction and/or re-utilisation of the whole or substantial parts of the database.

Understanding these rules and their implications is critical to compliant and ethical data management in the EU.

### Intellectual Property (IP) Categories

Intellectual Property Rights cover various aspects, from trade secrets to copyrights. Databases, for instance, may receive protection if they involve significant investment or creative arrangement. Understanding these rights and their international treaties, like the Berne Convention and TRIPs, is essential for managing data.

According to the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO, 2020), IP is often divided into two main categories:

1. **Industrial Property**: This includes patents for inventions, industrial designs, trademarks and geographical indications.
2. **Copyright and related rights**: These cover literary, artistic and scientific works, including performances and broadcasts.

#### Authorised uses of copyrighted works

In addition to the uses permitted under a licence, it is also possible to use copyrighted works that fall into the following categories:

1. **Public Domain**: Works that are no longer protected by copyright.
2. **Limitations and Exceptions (L&Es)**: Specific uses that are allowed under copyright law without the need for permission.

#### Considerations for copyrighted material

When using material, it is important to consider the following:

- The material may not be protected by copyright.
- It may be covered by other exclusive rights, such as the sui generis database right (SGDR), which may require additional and different permissions.

#### Copyright protection for databases

Copyright protection is conferred on databases when, by reason of the selection or arrangement of their contents, they constitute the author's own intellectual creation. This is stated in Article 3 (1) of the Database Directive.

#### Copyright & Licencing

Copyright of course is directly linked with licencing. Creative Commons (CC) licences provide a standardised way to grant the public permission to use creative works. Unlike the standard "All Rights Reserved" in copyright law, CC licences allow for "Some Rights Reserved", allowing for wider distribution and transformative use while retaining certain exclusive rights. 

When using Creative Commons licenses, it's important to consider the types of data and the compatibility of different licenses. National laws and the specific limitations and exceptions they may foresee must also be factored in to ensure compliance.

This topic will be covered in 2.5 Licencing with supporting material from FAIR-by-design Train of Trainers. 
### Scope of the GDPR (material and territorial scope)

The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) applies to personal data within a specific scope, ensuring robust protection and privacy for individuals. Here are the main aspects of its applicability:

1. **Processed by a controller or processor in the EU**: The GDPR applies to the processing of personal data by entities established in the EU, regardless of where the actual processing takes place.

2. **Of data subjects in the EU for specified activities and the controller and processor are not established in the EU**: The Regulation applies to data subjects in the EU, even if the controllers or processors are established outside the EU, provided that the processing activities relate to offering goods or services to, or monitoring the behaviour of, EU residents.

3. **In the context of the activities of an establishment of a controller or processor in the EU, even if the processing is not carried out in the EU**: If a controller or processor has an establishment in the EU, the GDPR applies to its data processing activities, regardless of whether the processing itself takes place inside or outside the EU.

4. **which form part of or are intended to form part of a filing system**: The regulation applies to personal data that form part of, or are intended to form part of, a structured set of data that is accessible according to certain criteria.

5. **Wholly or partly processed by automated means**: The GDPR applies to data processing activities carried out wholly or partly by automated means, ensuring that even automated data processing meets its strict requirements.

These scopes ensure comprehensive coverage of personal data processing activities, in line with the principles of lawfulness, fairness and transparency, and safeguarding individuals' data rights in different contexts and jurisdictions.

Under the GDPR, personal data must be processed lawfully, fairly, and transparently. It should be collected for specific, explicit, and legitimate purposes, be accurate and kept up to date, and be processed securely. These principles ensure that data subjects' rights are protected.

#### Main principles of processing of personal data

#### Principles

1. **Lawfulness, fairness and transparency**.
	   - Personal data must be "processed lawfully, fairly and transparently in relation to the data subject".

2. **Purpose limitation**
	   - Personal data must be 'collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a manner incompatible with those purposes'.

3. **Data minimisation**
	   - Personal data must be 'adequate, relevant and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which they are processed'.

4. **Accuracy**
	   - Personal data must be 'accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date'.

5. **Limitation of storage**
	   - Personal data must be "kept in a form which permits identification of data subjects for no longer than is necessary for the purposes for which the personal data are processed".

6. **Integrity and confidentiality**
	   - Personal data must be "processed in a manner that ensures appropriate security of personal data, including protection against unauthorised or unlawful processing and against accidental loss, destruction or damage, using appropriate technical or organisational measures".

7. **Accountability**
	   - The controller must be responsible for and able to demonstrate compliance with the previous points.

### Legal bases

Finally, there is a closed list of legal bases for processing personal data under the GDPR. The bases are the various legal grounds on which the processing of personal data is considered lawful.

- **Consent**.
	  - The data subject has given his or her consent to the processing of his or her personal data for one or more specific purposes.

- **Performance of a contract**
	  - The processing is necessary for the performance of a contract to which the data subject is party or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a contract.

- **Compliance with a legal obligation**.
	  - Processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller is subject.

- **Protection of vital interests**
	  - Processing is necessary to protect the vital interests of the data subject or of another natural person.

- **Public interest**
	  - Processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller.

- **Legitimate interest**
	  - Processing is necessary for the purposes of the legitimate interests pursued by the controller or by a third party, except where such interests are overridden by the interests or fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject which require the protection of personal data, in particular where the data subject is a child".

Under the GDPR, consent must be free, specific, informed and unambiguous, and therefore cannot be assumed. 

### References

General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). (n.d.). *Personal data*. Retrieved July 17, 2024, from[ https://gdpr-info.eu/issues/personal-data/#:~:text=GDPR%20Personal%20Data&text=Only%20if%20a%20processing%20of,identified%20or%20identifiable%20natural%20person.](https://gdpr-info.eu/issues/personal-data/#:~:text=GDPR%20Personal%20Data&text=Only%20if%20a%20processing%20of,identified%20or%20identifiable%20natural%20person.)

General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). (n.d.). _Art. 2 GDPR – Material scope_. Retrieved July 17, 2024, from [https://gdpr-info.eu/art-2-gdpr/](https://gdpr-info.eu/art-2-gdpr/)

General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). (n.d.). _Art. 3 GDPR – Territorial scope_. Retrieved July 17, 2024, from [https://gdpr-info.eu/art-3-gdpr/](https://gdpr-info.eu/art-3-gdpr/)

General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). (n.d.). _Art. 5 GDPR – Principles relating to processing of personal data_. Retrieved July 17, 2024, from [https://gdpr-info.eu/art-5-gdpr/](https://gdpr-info.eu/art-5-gdpr/)

General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). (n.d.). _Art. 6 GDPR – Lawfulness of processing_. Retrieved July 17, 2024, from [https://gdpr-info.eu/art-6-gdpr/](https://gdpr-info.eu/art-6-gdpr/)

World Intellectual Property Organization. (2020). **World Intellectual Property Indicators 2020** (WIPO Publication No. 450). [https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_450_2020.pdf](https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_450_2020.pdf)




