resources/1. Planning/Doing research in the SSH OS landscape/Open Science practices_particularities and specificities of SSH.md, before:

---
title: "Open science practices: particularities and specificities of SSH"
author: Skills4EOSC T2.3
tags:
  - FAIR-by-Design
  - Learning
  - Materials
  - FAIR
  - Learning
  - Objects
  - FAIR
  - Learning
  - Unit
  - Template
---

# Content



- What is Open Science?
    

	- Definition 
	    
	- Pillars
    
    






### Licensing

Ensure that your article can be reused under a CC BY 4.0 licence.

  

### Related Material (TOT) (Teachers)

Connects to the material for pedagogical reasons - exercise


### References

For in-text references (or actual source acknowledgement if an article is fully/mainly retrieved from an external resource - please note the copyright holder and terms of reuse - if we can’t make the article CC BY, then don’t use the source!). 

  
### Further reading

Search for relevant resources available in English or other if you know the language

### Related Skills4EOSC Training Materials (Teachers/Learners)

Connect the material with related pedagogical support and exercises if it is the case. - Connect if there are other material - talks about OS Pillars

Commit message:

Update Open Science practices_particularities and specificities of SSH.md

resources/1. Planning/Doing research in the SSH OS landscape/Open Science practices_particularities and specificities of SSH.md, after:

---
title: "Open science practices: particularities and specificities of SSH"
author: Skills4EOSC T2.3
tags:
  - FAIR-by-Design
  - Learning
  - Materials
  - FAIR
  - Learning
  - Objects
  - FAIR
  - Learning
  - Unit
  - Template
---
## Description

The first module of the training is an introduction of the Open Science environment to SSH researchers. This module has four learning outcomes.

- Describe the current policy landscape that shapes knowledge production and the way it affects the SSH Research Framework
- Identify SSH practices in Open Science
- Recognise SSH specificities within the research workflow during knowledge production from an ethical, legal and methodological perspective.
- Describe  what the research data management requirements and standards are

In this sub-module we will discuss:

- Open Science practices

- OS practices commonly adopted by the SSH

## Learning resources

- [Presentation slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1_vVTO-kKu6fbE1Kc661qu6fcjk6XNRAR/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=102604071504748959042&rtpof=true&sd=true)
## Open Science Practices

We have identified some of the best-known OS practices, which include a set of principles and methods aimed at improving transparency, accessibility and collaboration in research. 
Pre-registration and pre-printing are highlighted as promoting transparency, reducing bias, rapid dissemination, access, feedback and visibility. 

The FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable) and CARE (Collective Benefit, Authority to Control, Responsibility, Ethics) principles are well known for their focus on data management and ethical considerations. Bibliodiversity as a practice emphasises cultural and linguistic diversity and diverse publishing models. Data papers emphasise citation, discoverability and re-usability. 
Citizen science encourages public participation and engagement, fostering collaboration and innovation. Last but not least, multilingualism promotes inclusivity, cultural sensitivity and broader audience reach. 

### SSH Open Science Practices

Some of these practices aim to improve the quality and impact of research in the social sciences and humanities. Not all of these practices are currently used by SSH researchers. The FAIR and CARE principles are crucial for SSH and all disciplines. Bibliodiversity provides a platform for SSH researchers as it supports a diverse publication environment. And, of course, multilingualism is at the heart of citizen science and SSH research, given the local and regional context that these fields represent. 

### References

For in-text references (or actual source acknowledgement if an article is fully/mainly retrieved from an external resource - please note the copyright holder and terms of reuse - if we can’t make the article CC BY, then don’t use the source!). 

  
### Further reading

Search for relevant resources available in English or other if you know the language

### Related Skills4EOSC Training Materials (Teachers/Learners)

Connect the material with related pedagogical support and exercises if it is the case. - Connect if there are other material - talks about OS Pillars
