---
title: 2.2 File formats
author: Skills4EOSC T5.2
tags:
  - FAIR-by-Design
  - Materials
  - FAIR
  - FAIR
  - Active-Research
  - Data-Management
---
## Description

The second module focuses on what we call active research. It presents elements that correspond to different stages of the research: data collection, data processing, preservation and documentation.  In this section, RDM and more technical aspects related to the FAIR Principles are detailed. The learning outcomes are the following:

1. Identify different types of metadata
2. Identify open file formats
3. Storing Data
4. Managing sensitive data
5. Apply open licences and data usage rights
6. Document data

In this learning unit we will discuss aspects of file formats in relation to open science:

- File formats by type: text, audio, image
- Open vs Proprietary formats

## Learning resources

- [Presentation slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1UIfo8wwc6lbFn9aeu0GkqHtExj0Wh_Sb/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=102604071504748959042&rtpof=true&sd=true)

# File formats

Research data comes from a wide variety of instruments and software, and can even include handwritten notes. These data can exist in either physical or digital formats. In the context of open science, where reproducibility, replicability and the FAIR principles (Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability and Reusability) are paramount, it is crucial to make all data and research materials available in non-proprietary formats whenever possible. This practice ensures that data can be accessed, used and shared across platforms and by different users. The following sections provide comparisons and examples to illustrate the importance and benefits of adopting open file formats.

### Open File Formats

There are several key factors to consider when implementing data conversion to open file formats:

- **Open**: It is important to choose formats that are open, meaning that the specifications for the format are publicly available and free to use. This ensures that anyone can read, edit and share the data without the need for proprietary software.

- **Standard**: Choose formats that are standardised, meaning they are widely accepted and used by the community. Standardised formats often have better support, more robust documentation and a higher likelihood of compatibility across different systems and applications.

- **Interchangeable**: The chosen formats should be easily interchangeable, allowing seamless data exchange between different software and platforms. This interoperability is essential for collaboration, data integration and long-term accessibility.

- **Sustainable**: Ensure that formats are sustainable and long-lived, meaning that they are likely to be used and supported over time. This helps preserve data for future use and prevents obsolescence that can occur with proprietary or less widely adopted formats. 

By considering these factors, you can ensure that your data remains accessible, usable and compatible over the long term, facilitating better data management and preservation.

### Guidance on file formats

There are two important questions to ask in order to understand what to do with open file formats: What domain or sub-domain are you working with? And what repositories do you want to upload to? The responses should dictate what type of file formats you may need. 

However, several agencies have provided guidance on this type of issue. Usually the advice is simple, suggesting recommended or preferred formats as opposed to acceptable or non-preferred ones. The assumption is that sometimes it is indeed not possible to convert to a non-proprietary format, either because of the specific type of software needed to do the analysis, or because there is not yet an open source software alternative. 

What we have done here is to bring together advice from a range of vendors to give you an idea of what file formats are being discussed. It is up to you to decide what is or is not appropriate for your domain and specific research area.

| Types      | Recommended/Preferred | Accepted | Non-preferred |
| :--------- | :-------------------- | :------- | :------------ |
| Text       |                       |          |               |
| Audio      |                       |          |               |
| Image      |                       |          |               |
| Statistics |                       |          |               |
|            |                       |          |               |


### References


### Further reading

Swedish National Data Service

https://snd.se/en/manage-data/organise/file-format
https://snd.se/en/manage-data/guides/choosing-file-format

Utrecht University: 

https://geo-data-support.sites.uu.nl/open-science-open-data/fair-file-formats/

4TU 

https://data.4tu.nl/s/documents/Preferred_File_Formats_2023.pdf

Howtofair.dk

https://www.howtofair.dk/how-to-fair/file-formats/

CESSDA

https://dmeg.cessda.eu/Data-Management-Expert-Guide/3.-Process/File-formats-and-data-conversion

UK Data Service

https://ukdataservice.ac.uk/learning-hub/research-data-management/format-your-data/recommended-formats/

DANS

https://dans.knaw.nl/en/file-formats/