---
title: 2.3 Data storage
author: Skills4EOSC T5.2
tags:
  - FAIR-by-Design
  - Learning
  - Materials
  - FAIR
  - Learning
  - Objects
  - FAIR
  - Learning
  - Unit
  - Template
---
## Description

The second module focuses on what we call active research. It presents elements that correspond to different stages of the research: data collection, data processing, preservation and documentation.  In this section, RDM and more technical aspects related to the FAIR Principles are detailed. The learning outcomes are the following:

1. Identify different types of metadata
2. Identify open file formats
3. Storing Data
4. Managing sensitive data
5. Apply open licences and data usage rights
6. Document data

In this learning unit we will discuss aspects of data storage:

- From Local to Cloud to Repositories
- Storage medium

## Learning resources

- [Presentation slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1UIfo8wwc6lbFn9aeu0GkqHtExj0Wh_Sb/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=102604071504748959042&rtpof=true&sd=true)
# Store Data

#### The 3-2-1 Back up rule!

A widely accepted data backup and storage strategy is the 3-2-1 rule. This rule recommends that you keep three copies of your data on two different types of storage media, with one copy stored off-site. The offsite copy protects your data from local threats such as theft, fire, flood or natural disaster. Using two types of media increases the chances that at least one version will remain accessible if one type of media becomes obsolete or degrades. Keeping three copies ensures the existence of your data without excessive redundancy (Phegley, n.d. - Section: [Storage and Backup Best Practices](https://guides.library.upenn.edu/datamgmt/storage)).

Building a strategy for how to think on your data storage needs, the CESSDA Training Team provides a few key questions: 

- How much storage space do I need?
- Who needs access?
- How do I guard against data loss?
- How do I store Personal/Sensitive Data?

#### Storage Solutions

In terms of storage solutions, we continue to rely on the CESSDA Training Team's comprehensive guide, which outlines several key options:

- Portable devices: Ideal for mobility and convenience, portable devices such as external hard drives and USB flash drives allow you to take your data with you. They are useful for quick backups and transfers, but are vulnerable to physical damage and loss.
  
- Local storage: This includes storage directly on your computer or server. While it offers fast access and control over your data, it is vulnerable to hardware failure and local disasters such as fire or theft.
  
- Network drives: These are connected to your local network and can be accessed by multiple devices. Network Attached Storage (NAS) devices are great for collaborative environments and offer centralised management, but require proper network security measures to protect against unauthorised access.
  
- Cloud storage: Cloud services such as Google Drive, Dropbox and Amazon S3 offer scalable storage solutions with the benefit of offsite backups. They are great for disaster recovery and remote access, but they rely on internet connectivity and have ongoing costs. Make sure you understand the provider's security measures and privacy policies.

For more detailed advice on each type of storage solution, see the [Data Management Expert Guide - Storage] (https://dmeg.cessda.eu/Data-Management-Expert-Guide/4.-Store/Storage).

#### Storage media

In addition to considering the type of storage solution, it's important to evaluate the different storage media:

- Optical - CD/DVD: These are inexpensive and good for long-term storage, but have limited capacity and are becoming obsolete. They are also susceptible to physical damage and degradation over time.
  
- Magnetic - HDD (Hard Disk Drive): HDDs offer large storage capacities at a relatively low cost. They are suitable for both local and network storage solutions, but have moving parts that make them susceptible to mechanical failure.
  
- Flash - USB (Universal Serial Bus): USB flash drives are highly portable and convenient for small to medium data transfers. They are more durable than HDDs but can be easily lost or stolen.
  
- Flash - SSD (Solid State Drive): SSDs offer faster data access speeds and greater durability than HDDs because they have no moving parts. They are ideal for both local and portable storage, but are more expensive per gigabyte than HDDs.

When choosing storage solutions and media, consider factors such as data size, access speed, portability, cost and the importance of data security and redundancy. Combining different types of storage solutions and media can help create a robust data management strategy that ensures data security, accessibility and longevity.



### References

3-2-1 Rule: https://guides.library.upenn.edu/datamgmt/storage

CESSDA Training Team. (2020). CESSDA Data Management Expert Guide. CESSDA ERIC. [https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3820473](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3820473)

### Further reading

CESSDA Data Management Expert Guide: Storage: [https://dmeg.cessda.eu/Data-Management-Expert-Guide/4.-Store/Storage](https://dmeg.cessda.eu/Data-Management-Expert-Guide/4.-Store/Storage)

https://guides.library.upenn.edu/datamgmt/storage

