---
title: "3.2 Data Publishing: Linking data to publications"
author: Skills4EOSC T5.2
tags:
  - FAIR-by-Design
  - SSH
  - Metadata
  - Open-science
  - Publishing
---
## Description

The third module focuses on the evaluation of the research outcomes and their posterior preservation and dissemination. The module also tackles access and reuse of research outcomes. This item is actually part of the first step of the research lifecycle. It represents the beginning of a new cycle that draws from research outcomes properly preserved and disseminated. Learning outcomes include: 

- Design an Open Science publishing strategy for the dissemination of research results
- Identify and reuse existing data codes, publications and any other type of research output
- Link data to publications
- Implement FAIR-compliant strategies for monographs
- Assess the FAIRness of data and other research outputs

In this learning unit we will discuss concepts associated with data publishing:

- Data Publication Checklist
- Data Repositories
- Data Citation
- Data Availability Statements
- Data & Monographs

## Learning resources

- [Presentation slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1uiLlzHDp9ALzSEtr2c3tRRPb2IxmtR_K/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=102604071504748959042&rtpof=true&sd=true)
- [Publication Strategy and Open Science Planner](Publication strategy and open science)
- Activity idea


### Data publishing: linking data to publications

Linking publications to data promotes transparency, reproducibility and collaboration across disciplines. When researchers make their datasets and other output formats ([see the module on data in SSH](https://ssh-tot-fair-by-design.github.io/OS-RDM-SSH/latest/1.%20Planning/Doing%20research%20in%20the%20SSH%20OS%20landscape/1.5%20Research%20Lifecycle%20-%20Data%20in%20the%20SSH/#data-in-the-ssh)) available, they enable the scientific community to verify results, replicate studies and build on existing work. 

To maximise the impact of linking publications to data, it is essential to adhere to standardised data formats and metadata conventions to ensure that data are both discoverable and interpretable. This requires collaboration between researchers, publishers and funders to establish and enforce best practices for data sharing.

As a helpful measure, here is a publication checklist to always keep in mind (Table produced from Stockholm University: [Publish Research Data]( https://www.su.se/staff/researchers/research-data/preserve-research-information/publish-research-data-1.598234)):

| Checklist                                                                                                                                        |
| :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1. Select filenames that indicate the contents and are understandable&nbsp;                                                                      |
| 2. Store files in common -and ideally- open formats. Describe file formats and indicate relevant software&nbsp;&nbsp;                            |
| 3. Consider providing additional documentation on variables applied                                                                              |
| 4. &nbsp;Link data and metadata to standardized vocabularies standards ontologies&nbsp;&nbsp;                                                    |
| 5. Provide complete reference records including PIDs&nbsp;&nbsp;                                                                                 |
| 6. Link the deposited resource to authors institutions and other entities involved in or supporting the research project. Use PIDs (i.e. ORCIDs) |

#### Data repositories - Examples

##### DataverseNO - National Research Data Repository (Norway) - [Go to page](https://dataverse.no/)
DataverseNO is a national, multi-institutional repository for open research data in Norway. It provides a secure and reliable platform for researchers to share, publish and preserve their datasets, thereby increasing transparency and reproducibility in research. Managed by UiT The Arctic University of Norway, DataverseNO supports a wide range of disciplines and promotes best practices in data management, ensuring that research data remains accessible and reusable in the long term.

##### DANS Data Station for Social Sciences and Humanities -[Go to page](https://dans.knaw.nl/en/social-sciences-and-humanities/)
The DANS Data Station Social Sciences and Humanities is a prominent repository managed by the Dutch Data Archiving and Networked Services (DANS). It provides a specialised platform for storing, sharing and preserving research data in the social sciences and humanities. DANS provides comprehensive support and resources to researchers, ensuring that data are FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable), fostering academic collaboration and facilitating the reuse of data for new research.

##### Swedish National Data Service - [Go to page](https://snd.se/en)
The Swedish National Data Service (SND) is a leading national infrastructure for open access to research data in Sweden. It supports researchers in the social sciences, humanities and health sciences by providing services for data management, archiving and dissemination. SND aims to promote the availability and reuse of research data, thereby increasing the transparency and reproducibility of scientific research. By collaborating with Swedish universities and research institutions, SND ensures that high quality data resources are preserved and made available for future research.

##### Finnish Social Science Data Archive - [Go to page](https://www.fsd.tuni.fi/en/)
The Finnish Social Science Data Archive (FSD) is a central repository for social science research data in Finland. It provides a wide range of services to researchers, including data acquisition, preservation and dissemination. The FSD supports the FAIR principles by ensuring that data are findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable. By facilitating access to high quality data, FSD promotes the advancement of social science research and encourages the reuse of data in new studies, thus contributing to the growth of knowledge and innovation in the field.

### References

D.B. Deutz, M.C.H. Buss, J. S. Hansen, K. K. Hansen, K.G. Kjelmann, A.V. Larsen, E. Vlachos, K.F. Holmstrand (2020). How to FAIR: a Danish website to guide researchers on making research data more FAIR [https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3712065](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3712065)
### Further reading

Riley, Jenn, 2018, "Seeing Standards: A Visualization of the Metadata Universe", [https://doi.org/10.5683/SP2/UOHPVH](https://doi.org/10.5683/SP2/UOHPVH), Borealis, V3, UNF:6:gWl/jicj8wtJm4Grmph7TQ== [fileUNF]
### Licensing

Ensure that your article can be reused under a CC BY 4.0 licence.